remove outdated APM Server references from upstream OTel collector/SDK page (#6880)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/observability/apm/opentelemetry/upstream-opentelemetry-collectors-language-sdks.md

  debug:
    verbosity: detailed <3>
  otlp: <4>
    # Elastic endpoint without the "https://" prefix

>     endpoint: "${env:ELASTIC_OTLP_ENDPOINT}" <5> <7>

Reviewer: Should we explicitly include port numbers here?

Author: I added the recommendation note.

    headers:

>       # Elastic API key or secret token

Author: **Style / Technical accuracy** — The comment was changed from `# Elastic APM Server secret token` to `# Elastic API key or secret token`, but the code hardcodes the `Bearer` prefix:

```yaml
Authorization: "Bearer ${env:ELASTIC_SECRET_TOKEN}"
```

`Bearer` is the secret-token format only. API key authorization requires `ApiKey` as the prefix. A user who copies this snippet and substitutes an API key without reading footnote 6 will end up with a broken auth header.

Suggested fix:
```suggestion
      # Elastic secret token (for API key auth use ApiKey prefix — see footnote 6)
```

3. The [debug exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/debugexporter) is helpful for troubleshooting, and supports configurable verbosity levels: `basic` (default), `normal`, and `detailed`.
4. Elastic endpoint configuration. Elastic supports a ProtoBuf payload via both the OTLP protocol over gRPC transport [(OTLP/gRPC)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/#otlpgrpc) and the OTLP protocol over HTTP transport [(OTLP/HTTP)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/#otlphttp). To learn more about these exporters, refer to the OpenTelemetry Collector documentation: [OTLP/HTTP Exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlphttpexporter) or [OTLP/gRPC exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlpexporter). When adding an endpoint to an existing configuration an optional name component can be added, like `otlp/elastic`, to distinguish endpoints as described in the [OpenTelemetry Collector Configuration Basics](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#basics).

> 5. Hostname and port of the Elastic endpoint. For self-managed deployments, use the address of your [EDOT Collector in gateway mode](elastic-agent://reference/edot-collector/modes.md) (for example, `edot-collector:4317` for gRPC or `edot-collector:4318` for HTTP). For {{ech}}, use the [Managed OTLP endpoint](opentelemetry://reference/motlp/index.md).

Reviewer 2: self-managed deployments also = ECE and ECK?

Author: Yes, and it would be better to point that out explicitly. I fixed it

```

> 1. The receivers, like the [OTLP receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/otlpreceiver), that forward data emitted by APM agents, or the [host metrics receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/hostmetricsreceiver).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The receivers, like the [OTLP receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/otlpreceiver), that forward data emitted by OpenTelemetry SDKs, or the [host metrics receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/hostmetricsreceiver).
```

> 2. Use the [Batch processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/batchprocessor/README.md) and the [memory limiter processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/memorylimiterprocessor/README.md). For more information, refer to [recommended processors](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/README.md#recommended-processors).

Reviewer: Should we mention why the Batch processor and the memory limiter are useful?

Author: The footnote already links to the recommended processors docs which cover when and why to use each. I could add a brief inline summary here if you'd prefer, but I'd rather keep the footnote short.

Reviewer: It appears to me to be inconsistent i.e. with 1. where we say something about the "why"

> that forward data emitted by

While reading I was wondering why the "why" is not mentioned for the memory limiter and batch processor. From a user perspective it can be distracting having to go read another page to figure out why do I need them. Do you know what I mean?

Author: Ok I see what you mean. I can try to think of a way to add it that keeps it short & sweet

Author: The batch processor is buggy, see here: https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7032#discussion_r3458692473

We shouldn't recommend it at all, so I removed it.

3. The [debug exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/debugexporter) is helpful for troubleshooting, and supports configurable verbosity levels: `basic` (default), `normal`, and `detailed`.
4. Elastic endpoint configuration. Elastic supports a ProtoBuf payload via both the OTLP protocol over gRPC transport [(OTLP/gRPC)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/#otlpgrpc) and the OTLP protocol over HTTP transport [(OTLP/HTTP)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/#otlphttp). To learn more about these exporters, refer to the OpenTelemetry Collector documentation: [OTLP/HTTP Exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlphttpexporter) or [OTLP/gRPC exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlpexporter). When adding an endpoint to an existing configuration an optional name component can be added, like `otlp/elastic`, to distinguish endpoints as described in the [OpenTelemetry Collector Configuration Basics](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#basics).

> 5. Hostname and port of the Elastic endpoint. For self-managed deployments, use your {{apm-server}} address (for example, `apm-server:8200`). For {{ech}} (ECH), use the [Managed OTLP endpoint](opentelemetry://reference/motlp/index.md).

Reviewer: Why do we expect users to send data to the APM Server for self-managed deployments? Shouldn't we recommend to send the data to an Elastic Agent with an OTLP endpoint?

Author: Changed!

5. Hostname and port of the Elastic endpoint. For self-managed deployments, use your APM Server address (for example, `apm-server:8200`). For Elastic Cloud Hosted (ECH), use the [Managed OTLP endpoint](opentelemetry://reference/motlp/index.md).
6. Credential for Elastic [secret token authorization](/solutions/observability/apm/secret-token.md) (`Authorization: "Bearer a_secret_token"`) or [API key authorization](/solutions/observability/apm/api-keys.md) (`Authorization: "ApiKey an_api_key"`).

> 7. Environment-specific configuration parameters can be conveniently passed in as environment variables documented [here](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#environment-variables) (e.g. `ELASTIC_OTLP_ENDPOINT` and `ELASTIC_SECRET_TOKEN`).

Author: **Style** — `e.g.` is a Latin abbreviation the Elastic style guide prohibits. Use `for example,` instead.

```suggestion
7. Environment-specific configuration parameters can be conveniently passed in as environment variables documented [here](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#environment-variables) (for example, `ELASTIC_OTLP_ENDPOINT` and `ELASTIC_SECRET_TOKEN`).
```

4. {{obs-serverless}} endpoint configuration. Elastic supports a ProtoBuf payload via both the OTLP protocol over gRPC transport [(OTLP/gRPC)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/otlp.md#otlpgrpc) and the OTLP protocol over HTTP transport [(OTLP/HTTP)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/otlp.md#otlphttp). To learn more about these exporters, see the OpenTelemetry Collector documentation: [OTLP/HTTP Exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlphttpexporter) or [OTLP/gRPC exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlpexporter).
5. URL of the [Managed OTLP endpoint](opentelemetry://reference/motlp/index.md). Find your endpoint URL in the {{serverless-full}} project settings.
6. Credential for Elastic API key authorization (`Authorization: "ApiKey an_api_key"`).

> 7. Environment-specific configuration parameters can be conveniently passed in as environment variables documented [here](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables) (e.g. `ELASTIC_OTLP_ENDPOINT` and `ELASTIC_API_KEY`).

Author: **Style** — Same as above: `e.g.` → `for example,`.

```suggestion
7. Environment-specific configuration parameters can be conveniently passed in as environment variables documented [here](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables) (for example, `ELASTIC_OTLP_ENDPOINT` and `ELASTIC_API_KEY`).
```

You’re now ready to export traces and metrics from your services and applications.

::::{important}

> When using the OpenTelemetry Collector, send data through the [`OTLP` exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlphttpexporter). Using other methods, like the [`elasticsearch` exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/elasticsearchexporter), bypasses all of the validation and data processing that Elastic performs. In addition, your data will not be viewable in your {{observability}} project if you use the `elasticsearch` exporter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using the OpenTelemetry Collector, send data through the [`OTLP` exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter/otlphttpexporter). Using other methods, like the [`elasticsearch` exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/elasticsearchexporter), bypasses all the validation and data processing that Elastic performs. In addition, your data will not be viewable in your {{observability}} project if you use the `elasticsearch` exporter.
```

> The following instructions show how to send data directly from a contrib OpenTelemetry SDK to Elastic, which is appropriate when getting started. However, sending data from an OpenTelemetry SDK to the OpenTelemetry Collector is preferred, as the Collector processes and exports data to Elastic. Read more about when and how to use a collector in the [OpenTelemetry documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/#when-to-use-a-collector).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following instructions show how to send data directly from an OpenTelemetry SDK to Elastic, which is appropriate when getting started. However, sending data from an OpenTelemetry SDK to the OpenTelemetry Collector is preferred, as the Collector processes and exports data to Elastic. Read more about when and how to use a collector in the [OpenTelemetry documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/#when-to-use-a-collector).
```

Reviewer: IIUC the example above for self-managed deployments does not show the use of the elasticsearch exporter.

Author: Could you elaborate on what you mean here? It's unclear to me. The callout is a general page-level warning, meant to catch readers who might consider reaching for the elasticsearch exporter as an alternative to the OTLP exporter.

Author: I thought about it some more and I see now that the second sentence ("your data will not be viewable...") was outdated given that the ES exporter now supports the otel mapping mode. I've updated it to remove that claim and cross-link to the limitations page instead.

::::

To export traces and metrics to Elastic, instrument your services and applications with the OpenTelemetry API, SDK, or both. For example, if you are a Java developer, you need to instrument your Java app with the [OpenTelemetry agent for Java](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation). Refer to the [OpenTelemetry Instrumentation guides](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/) to download the OpenTelemetry agent or SDK for your language.

Define environment variables to configure the OpenTelemetry agent or SDK and enable communication with Elastic. For example, if you are instrumenting a Java app, define the following environment variables:

::::{applies-switch}

:::{applies-item} stack:

```bash
export OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=checkoutService,service.version=1.1,deployment.environment=production

> export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=https://elastic-endpoint:8200

Reviewer: 8200 is the port number of the APM Server. OpenTelemetry collectors or the managed OTLP endpoint listens on 4317 (grpc) and 4318 (HTTP)

Author: You're right, I missed that. Thanks!

export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS="Authorization=Bearer a_secret_token"
export OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER="otlp" \
export OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER="otlp" \ <1>
java -javaagent:/path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent-all.jar \
     -classpath lib/*:classes/ \
     com.mycompany.checkout.CheckoutServiceServer
```

1. The OpenTelemetry logs intake through Elastic is in technical preview. {applies_to}`stack: preview`

`OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`
:   Fields that describe the service and the environment that the service runs in. Refer to [attributes](/solutions/observability/apm/opentelemetry/attributes.md) for more information.

`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT`

> :   Elastic endpoint URL. For self-managed deployments, use your {{apm-server}} address (for example, `https://elastic-endpoint:8200`). For {{ech}} (ECH), use the [Managed OTLP endpoint](opentelemetry://reference/motlp/index.md).

Reviewer: Having apm-server address here looks misaligned with the rest. It's either another OTel Collector or the managed OTLP endpoint that makes sense.

    For information on how to format an API key, refer to [API keys](/solutions/observability/apm/api-keys.md).

    Note the required space between `Bearer` and `a_secret_token`, and `ApiKey` and `an_api_key`.

    ::::{note}
    If you are using a version of the Python OpenTelemetry agent *earlier than* 1.27.0, the content of the header *must* be URL-encoded. You can use the Python standard library’s `urllib.parse.quote` function to encode the content of the header.
    ::::

`OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER`
:   Metrics exporter to use. refer to [exporter selection](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/#exporter-selection) for more information.

`OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER`
:   Logs exporter to use. Refer to [exporter selection](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/#exporter-selection) for more information.

:::

:::{applies-item} serverless:

```bash
export OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=checkoutService,service.version=1.1,deployment.environment=production

> export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=https://your-motlp-endpoint

Reviewer: We should explicitly include the port (e.g., :4317 or :4318) here.

    For information on how to format an API key, refer to [API keys](/solutions/observability/apm/api-keys.md).

    ::::{note}
    If you are using a version of the Python OpenTelemetry agent *earlier than* 1.27.0, the content of the header *must* be URL-encoded. You can use the Python standard library’s `urllib.parse.quote` function to encode the content of the header.

    ::::

`OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER`
:   Metrics exporter to use. Refer to [exporter selection](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/#exporter-selection) for more information.

`OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER`
:   Logs exporter to use. Refer to [exporter selection](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/#exporter-selection) for more information.

:::

::::

You are now ready to collect traces and [metrics](/solutions/observability/apm/opentelemetry/collect-metrics.md), and then [verify](/solutions/observability/apm/opentelemetry/collect-metrics.md#apm-open-telemetry-verify-metrics) and [visualize](/solutions/observability/apm/opentelemetry/collect-metrics.md#apm-open-telemetry-visualize) them.

> ## Proxy requests to {{apm-server}} [apm-open-telemetry-proxy-apm]

Reviewer: Do we need to update this section and describe how to do it with a collector?

Author: I added a note steering new users toward EDOT Collector / mOTLP. A full how-to for proxying to the EDOT Collector would be useful but should probably be a separate page/section (probably in the EDOT Collector docs). I'll file a follow-up issue if you agree.

Reviewer: Agree.
